---
layout: post
title: "No Digital Day"
---

While my plummet into 1922 took place on October 2nd, the experience actually began the day before, as I set my sights on the goal ahead of me. I knew that adhering to the technological standards (or lack thereof) would require certain preparations. The experiment proved more difficult than I expected, and throughout the day I was constantly aware of my reliance on technology, as a need, habit, and distraction. 

To prepare, I first jotted down the phone numbers of important people in my life. Because of my dependence on my cell phone and the contact list it comes with, I never was forced to memorize phone numbers. The only number I have memorized is my mom’s cell phone, and that is only because I learned it before I received a phone of my own. Even the act of creating this list was enlightening, as I attempted to quantify the number of people I speak to on a daily basis.  While my phone holds hundreds of contacts, I could only think of eight names and corresponding numbers that I wanted to ensure I had the ability to use. Why do I have all of these names stored on my phone if I rarely contact anyone outside my immediate circle? I also did some research on the nearest phone booth—which would not have been possible without the Internet. After this was completed, I transferred my cell phone reminders to a daily planner, took off my Apple watch and put on a wristwatch, and took out an old alarm clock from the closet.  If I had plans to travel somewhere, I would definitely have needed to jot down directions, but I only had to walk to and from campus. My sense of directions is notoriously bad, and I use my GPS to get almost anywhere. This could stem from my lack of observation, as my attention is typically directed at my phone when I’m in the passenger seat, instead of on the road. With these preparations made, I was ready for the day to come. However, at the time I was still unaware of how difficult it would be to purge myself of all post-1992 technology (even just for a day). 

My day started with difficulty waking up. I was so accustomed to the specific sound of my iPhone alarm, that I was not attuned to the sound the alarm clock would make. Once it finally woke me, I automatically reached for my phone. I stopped myself before hitting the home button, tallied the occurrence on my list, and realized that I typically begin my day looking at my emails and texts. I then turn to the weather and eventually social media or the news. After thinking closely, I have realized that this two or three minute habit signals the start of my day. On one hand, it probably isn’t beneficial to automatically turn my eyes to my screen first-thing in the morning. On the other hand, it does make me feel connected to the world and allows me to be aware of the events going on around me. On No-digital Day, I didn’t have this ability and felt less cognizant of current events. 

Another overarching takeaway for me was first revealed on my walk to class. I almost always have my headphones in while walking, with music or voices playing in my ears. I enjoy listening to news or sports podcasts that review the events of the previous day, or just music. Again, this allows me to feel knowledgeable, but podcasts and music also provide entertainment for me. I noticed the absence of noise throughout the day: walking to class, walking to meet partner-project, working out, doing homework, cleaning my room, and even showering. I took note of this, and upon reflection, realized that I don’t enjoy silence. What does this say about my ability to be alone with my thoughts? When I didn’t have the noise I was used to, I could feel my mind spinning. I thought about my homework, what I needed at the grocery store, what my sister may be doing, etc. While this was a little overwhelming, I also found myself being more aware of what is around me. While walking I noticed statues, trees, or landmarks on campus that I was never aware of before. I also became a much more avid people-watcher, studying my surroundings. Conversations around technology often discuss technology as a visual distraction, drawing peoples’ attention away from their work or personal interactions. My reliance on music or podcast streaming was actually a distraction from my own thoughts. For me, it is not an intentional distraction; I don’t purposely try to distract myself with noise. Instead, I enjoy the background noise, and as a result, am less in tune with my own inner thoughts. 

In fact, seeing technology as a type of distraction was perhaps the most enlightening aspect of the experiment. Previously, I didn’t like to consider myself someone who was ‘obsessed’ with my phone, or unable to live without it. My thirty-one tallies, however, told a different story. After looking through my notes that detailed when I reached for my phone, some consistencies arise. Like my frequent headphone use, the subconscious need to look through my phone occurred most often when I was alone. When I was waiting for class to begin, riding on the T, eating lunch, or sitting by myself, I typically thought the most about checking Twitter, scrolling through Instagram, or reading my text messages. On a daily basis, I use these activities to kill time, but without them, I stood or sat idly—hands in pockets, watching what was going on around me. I found that the more I thought about it, the more I was inclined to look at my phone. Seeing other people on their phones had a similar effect. I felt as though I was missing out on something, and I was jealous of other peoples’ ability to mindlessly look at their screens. I also noticed the urge to use my phone if I was talking to an acquaintance or someone I did not want to speak with. I often wished to disengage and use my phone as a way to escape the conversation. A pattern emerged; when I was bored, alone, or wanted to distract myself, I felt the impulse to use my phone. 

This being said, being with my friends did not eliminate the instinct to use technology. In fact, being in my apartment with my roommates brought forth another wave of technological dependence. It was the absence of technology that opened my eyes to how frequently we utilize it, especially in our own home. Luckily, my roommates understood the terms of my assignment and refrained from using the TV in the living room. Instead, they sat on the couch, phones in hand, using social media or texting their other friends. Being separated from the situation, an observer rather than a participant, I was able to witness the impact of technology on our social engagements first hand. If something newsworthy or funny appeared on their screen, they would sometimes laugh then relay it to me. The experience of receiving information second hand was different than seeing it for myself. What does this say about people who do not have the ability to constantly be on their phones, surveying current events or gossip? I felt left out and removed after just a day, which illuminates the way in which access to information is a determining factor in our lives. 
	On a normal day, my roommates and I would most likely watch television or a movie. They (somewhat reluctantly) allowed me to continue the experiment, and refrained from using the T.V. Instead, I offered that we play a game. This suggestion received odd looks at first, since we probably haven’t played a board or card game in the four years we’ve lived together. After beginning, we all noticed that without looking at our phones, we were more deeply invested in conversations. We moved beyond the normal small talk, and delved into deeper topics. Putting my phone away and turning the television off allowed me to be a more active participant in the night. I wasn’t distracted by the buzzing of my phone, and I wasn’t sidetracked. Rather than half-listening/half-scrolling, I was a better listener, and therefore a better communicator. Because I see these people on a daily basis (when I am using technology), I was able to directly compare the experience, and I felt the time spent with my friends was more fulfilling without digital distractions. 

For the most part, I was satisfied with my digital hiatus. One aspect of the day that was tricky, however, was navigating my school work without technology. I selected a day that I only had one class, but I was still impacted by the lack of computer and Internet. In class, I used a notebook and pen to take notes. My professor tended to talk quickly, and by the end my notes were chicken scratch. I did feel like I was able to pay more attention and think critically about the lecture. I ran into a problem during a group project, when my partner had the ability to use technology and I did not. I helped as much as I could, but understandably, she had to take the lead. This again highlighted the disparity between those who have the ability to use technology and those who don’t. A similar feeling arose when I wanted to quickly google something or check a synonym. However, the educational impacts were not all negative. Because I printed my materials, I was able to experience off-screen reading with no distractions or technology. I typically prefer to read on paper, but I am consistently disturbed by the vibrations of my phone or apple watch. This time, however, I felt as though I absorbed the information more clearly, and retained more to memory. The pros and cons of a technology-free school day were both evident. Limiting technological interferences while reading or listening is beneficial, it is also important to have access to the Internet, especially when your peers don’t have the obstacle of being Internet free. 

While I’m not sure if I would voluntarily participate again, the benefits of “un-plugging” became clear to me throughout No Digital Day. It forced me to be alone with my thoughts, and not have the comfort of background noise. Since I became more aware of when I seek the distractions of technology (when I’m alone, when I’m bored, when I want to dis-engage with someone), I can use that information to try to limit my mindless phone use. I was more involved in my surroundings and the people around me, highlighting how technology distracts me from being an active participant in the world.  I also witnessed first hand how the access to technology helps to determine who controls the flow of information. Without it, I was reliant on other people to filter the information, decide what was important, and relay it to me. I can see how this works on a larger scale, determining the power structure of society.  From the minute I woke up to the second I fell asleep, I felt as though a small part of me was missing; my technology is so engrained in my life that I don’t feel right without it. I hope that by being aware of this, I am able to take small daily precautions to help mitigate the negative impacts and highlight the benefits that are linked to technology. 

