---
layout: post
title: "Fitbit, Privacy, and Social Norms"
---

As I mentioned in class this week, I’m very interested in the way that technology represents and re-presents societal and cultural customs and norms. To me, this idea is overwhelming evident in wearable devices. In fact, this is the main center of my Capstone project. 

First, Knight discusses the tie between cultural norms and wearable technologies. She begins by explaining how the body is “never a neutral site” and “never a blank canvas”. Bodies and humans can never be completely detached from the society and culture they are submersed in. When wearable technologies are placed on a body, it doesn’t create a norm, but rather interacts with ones already in play. I want to touch on just two social assumptions that are reinforced through wearable technologies. Knight mentions that the emphasis of Fitbits and other wearable trackers ultimately align with the idea that being “fit” is better than being less fit. She writes, “Consider, for instance, how interpretations of fitness trackers may morph in relation to norms regarding which bodies are constructed as already “fit” versus those that are othered in some way, via age, gender, race, or ability. The device interfaces with the
body on which it is worn and inscribes a relationship to “fitness”” In this passage, Knight is explaining how the inherent ideas and technology behind wearable devices reinforce the othering of certain people, while declaring others “fit”. The device measures fitness, motivates people to be fit, and is designed for active people.
 
A similar and related societal norm that wearable devices reinforce is the idea that more data is better data. This is the same logic that founder of the Quantified Selves movement, Gary Wolf, subscribed to. There is an assumed to be a link between exorbitant data collection and “fitness”, and the language behind wearable devices adheres to this. Fitness devices promote healthy lifestyles, but they only have the ability to track. They can not force you to exercise or prevent you from eating something, they only give you the ability to track it. This aligns with the idea that tracking more data makes you healthy. 

I want to examine how these two ideas is furthered through the idea of monetary compensation, like wellness programs at Northeastern and other businesses. At Northeastern, employees can opt into a program where their Fitbit is connected to Northeastern’s systems, and they receive money (400$ a year) if they reach a certain amount of steps. While my capstone project involves privacy, I wanted to look at how programs like this interact with the basis of society. On the forefront, Northeastern is attempting to lower health premiums by keeping employees active. In turn, however, Northeastern is paying employees for the ability to track their personal and private data. Money serves as a motivation to adhere to the common practice of tracking and collecting information, as well as being “fit”. 

I wanted to further this idea briefly and discuss how algorithms (while they are not fastened onto people in the same way as wearables) also reinforce stereotypes and common attitudes. The cycle of technology informing and being by stereotypes is discussed in “Algorithms of Oppression”. She explains how Google search results often match incorrect assumptions of society, and as a result, further those assumptions. Much like the bodies that Knight describes, the algorithms used in Google searches are not neutral nor are they separate from the society they are a part of. 
