---
layout: post
title: "Attention Blindness and Collaborative Efforts"
---

For this blog post, I wanted to dive deeper into Cathy Davidson’s Now You See It—a piece that encompasses the main ideas we have read and discussed over the past two weeks. Specifically, I wanted to dissect her idea of collaboration, and how attention blindness has the potential to spur more active collaboration. Attention blindness, as discussed by academics and scientists alike, is often looked at as purely a negative effect of the current technological society. Even the phrase, attention blindness, has a debilitating connotation. It presents a loss of something, rather than any type of gain. Davidson, however, aims to look at attention blindness in a more positive light. She writes:

"Attention blindness is the fundamental structuring principle of the brain, and I believe that it presents us with a tremendous opportunity. My take is different from that of many neuroscientists: Where they perceive the shortcomings of the individual, I sense opportunity for collaboration. If we see selectively but we don't all select the same things to see, that also means we don't all miss the same things"

The logic behind this theory seems simple enough. If we all choose to focus on different aspects of an image, when we work together and collaborate, we should be able to see the entire picture. Continuing with the metaphor Davidson sets out, “If some of us can accurately count basketballs in a confusing situation and some can see the gorilla, we can pool our insights and together see the whole picture.” This thought process seems rather straightforward, right? In fact, other theories we have read in class allude to this idea of collaboration in the digital age. In Encyclopedia Anxiety, Reagle quotes Clay Shirky, and briefly touches on the collaborative possibilities of the web. 

So, if attention blindness can be mitigated by collaborative efforts, why hasn’t this idea been more fully embraced? This question brings to light issues that may be inherent of human nature, and difficult for any one person to pin down. However, I think Davidson has one theory that could explain why compiling different perspectives is easier said than done. Attention blindness does not create an incorrect vision, only an incomplete one. Because of this, people who ‘see’ two different things in an image are both correct, and are often unwilling to shift their perspectives. 

This line of thinking can help explain why people with different political ideologies, cultures, and backgrounds are (typically) unable to compromise or collaborate. Peoples’ perspectives are often fortified by those around them. As I’ve mentioned in another blog post, each person’s ‘truth’, ‘vision’, or ‘focus’ (these words are interchangeable) is shaped by their own background, cultural norm, and custom”. Davidson mentions this as she writes, “In situations where we share the same cultural script, we proceed as if that script were natural.” In most circumstances, it is invisible. That’s what natural means”. While this may seem like a tangent, the idea of “natural” cultural scripts is directly connected to attention blindness. As a person continues to function within their own ‘natural’ cultural script, they are blinding themselves to other peoples’ viewpoints. This cyclic motion prevents collaboration, as people are unable to come to terms with a focus that is different than their own. 

With that being said, what can be done to help move this process along? I would argue that the first step to increased collaboration is increased awareness and a better understanding of attention blindness. Accepting the concept would allow people to be aware of other possible perspectives, which is the first step in seeing and utilizing them. Furthermore, a shift away from language like “natural” could help society understand that ‘normalcy’ is both a cause and effect of attention blindness. As Davidson explains, we are in a “transitional moment” in history. With the amount of content and information around us increasing exponentially, it is more important now than ever to cover each other’s blind spots and achieve a more rounded idea of focus. 
