---
layout: post
title: "Montfort Lecture"
---

Nick Montfort’s lecture, “How Poetry and Computing Factor into our Future” began with potential to be informative, imaginative, and interesting. 

Initially, he dissected the difference between “predicting” and “future making”. Using examples like Vannevar Bush and Engelbart, he explained that predicting the future is an inaccurate way to describe technological work and advancements. Montfort prefers the term “future making” to refer to the ways in which we can systematically plan for a better future by imagining it and contemplating it. To Montfort, future making involves thinking individually, collaboratively, and culturally. In a time where people can be quite cynical about the future and the problems that accompany it, I actually thought the idea of “future making” could serve as a useful, productive, and possibly more optimistic way to think about what will come. 

Even some of the work he presented was attention grabbing and had the potential to be explored more fully. The pieces he showed to prove his “future-making” point (many of which were his own?) brought up themes like gender relations and stereotypes, literary traditions, translation of languages, and imperialism in naming traditions. He listed these themes explicitly on a slide, yet did not explain them, or even begin to show how the poems relate to “future making”.  Similarly, he spoke on the way computational poetry promotes new ways of thinking about reading and writing. Again, though, he did not fully connect these poems to the root of his presentation. 

The fallacies that I found in Montfort’s presentation stemmed from one idea—that he claimed to have “no intent” as he creates his work. Here, I politely call B.S. This question arose when a student asked Montfort what his intent was in selecting to draw from Wikipedia pages about mass shootings to create his book, “Hard West Turn”. He claimed that because a computer program creates the sentences in the book, it is impossible for him to write with any “intent”. However, he still wrote the program, made the decision to use the topic of violence, and decided to draw from Wikipedia. He also very intently took away proper nouns, added a beginning narrative, and vowed to remake the book annually. These are all decisions that he made with a specific artistic expression in mind, and to claim “no intent” is to shy away from any criticism and place a veil of silence over the piece. His answers to these questions reminded me of a political candidate, not wanting to cause any riffs by being honest. What could have been a very thought-provoking project that questioned the normalcy of violence by making it strange and de-familiar, was in fact, slightly invalidated. 

Despite this, the idea of pulling from Wikipedia to create something new at first seemed intriguing to me. The randomness of the book stemmed from the computer program, but the work was created by other people. Wikipedia is a public resource, but what happens when he capitalizes on the intellectual work of others, and in fact profits from it? Biases that are engrained in Wikipedia (the type of people who contribute to it and are included in it) are then further reinforced by his book. What are the implications of this? 

The way he spoke to students and answered (or failed to answer) questions bolstered my frustrations. I felt as though he was condescending and systematically avoided truthful interactions. He cut people off, seemed to value computer science based questions more than other majors, and spoke differently to professors than students. He failed to acknowledge that not everyone was well-versed in his area of study, and did not cater his responses to the people attending the lecture. If he did not want to accept questions, he should have ended his talk without them. The only defense I could craft for him is that perhaps he is used to constantly defending his un-conventional work and processes, and now he has trouble dropping his guard and being genuine with those attempting to understand it. 

What began as a lecture with potential, left me with an empty stomach and a bitter taste in my mouth. I thought I may have missed the point, or was being too critical. However, the sentiments I felt were expressed by other peers I spoke to, so I guess I was not alone in my views. On a positive note, I’m still glad I attended. learned how not to discuss my work in the future, and how not to speak to people who want to learn about it.
