---
layout: post
title: "What is a game? (And Does it Matter?)"
---
I will admit: I am not a gamer. I have never really played online games, and I’ve never had any interest in them at all. That being said, I actually thoroughly enjoyed from my experience with playing online ‘games’ this week. Games being in air-quotes is not an accident, but is instead indicative of my main takeaway from the gaming unit. While many people have many ideas about what a game is and what a game is not, it’s still unclear. To me, that’s okay. 

After playing Gone Home, we were faced with two in-class questions. Question 1 was, “Is it a game? WOWN?” and Question 2 was “Is it literature? WOWN?”. After a clarification on WOWN (why or why not), we got to work trying to parse out the differences between the two, and fit Gone Home into one of the two categories. Here, we hit a roadblock. We discussed that games have certain features like mechanics, contain an objective, need a player (or players), have rules or strategy, and are interactive. This list is not extensive, and there are many other aspects of games that are debated. We also discussed similarities between games and literature; both have a development of a tone, creation of a narrative, and a specific pace. This conversation is not limited to the walls of our classroom, and is often discussed within gaming communities. But why?

In the “Hegemony of Play” authors Fron, Fullerton, Ford Morie, and Pearce speak of this debate, and mention the incessant tendency to categorize and qualify games. They write, “At a deeper level many might argue that #GamerGate is about who is a gamer and what games are. GamerGaters also defend "real games" over imitations and phony products, and much of the wrath of the group is consequently directed at independent and alternative game producers” To an extent, I understand the need to maintain certain standards that validate gaming, particularly for a field that has been belittled and de-valued in past. However, after playing games this week and reading “The Hegemony of Play”, it seems as though the need to categorize and prioritize “real” games over non-games is what causes the “hegemony of play” and the exclusionary practices that the gaming industry upholds. This issue is furthered as many of the scorned alternative games are created by minority groups, rather than white males who create the majority of games. By having the power to determine what is and isn’t a game, those in power uphold their power, and it becomes more difficult for other groups of people to obtain influence in the genre. 

So, what would happen if everyone stopped trying to categorize games, literature, and other forms of art? What if the answer to both “Is it a game?” and “Is it literature?” was “yes”? To me, the two don’t have to be mutually exclusive, but instead can coincide with one another to create complex pieces of work. Perhaps if the categorizing, labeling, and classifying of games was put to an end, a more accepting and open-minded attitude would prevail. 
